DEPENDENCY-BASED RELATION EXTRACTION

Overview
Dependency-based extraction uses grammatical structure of sentences rather than surface patterns. A dependency parser analyzes the sentence and produces a tree describing how words are syntactically related.

This structure allows the system to identify relationships even when the wording changes.

Goal
Identify subject–predicate–object relationships using grammatical dependencies and convert them into triples.

Example sentence:
Leonard Randle was born on February 12, 1949.

Desired triple:
(Randle, birth_date, February 12 1949)

Step-by-Step Process

Step 1: Text Preprocessing
Clean the paragraph so that the sentences contain standard punctuation and spacing.

Example:
Randle was born on February 12, 1949. He played for the Seattle Mariners.

Step 2: Sentence Segmentation
Break the paragraph into sentences.

Sentence 1: Randle was born on February 12, 1949.
Sentence 2: He played for the Seattle Mariners.

Step 3: Named Entity Recognition
Detect entities in the sentence.

Example:
Randle → PERSON
February 12, 1949 → DATE
Seattle Mariners → ORGANIZATION

Step 4: Dependency Parsing
Generate a dependency tree for the sentence. The tree shows how words relate to each other.

Example sentence:
Randle was born on February 12, 1949.

Simplified dependency structure:

born
├── subject → Randle
└── modifier → February 12, 1949

This tells us that the person Randle is connected to the verb "born" and the date.

Step 5: Identify Relation Trigger Words
Certain verbs or predicates indicate specific relations.

Examples:

born → birth_date
played → played_for
served → office
married → spouse

So if the parser identifies the verb "born" connecting a person and a date, the relation is birth_date.

Step 6: Extract Subject and Object
Using the dependency tree, identify:

subject entity
object entity

Example sentence:
He played for the Seattle Mariners.

Dependency structure:

played
├── subject → He
└── object → Mariners

Extraction:
subject = Randle
relation = played_for
object = Seattle Mariners

Triple:
(Randle, played_for, Seattle Mariners)

Step 7: Generate Knowledge Graph Triples
Convert the extracted relation into a triple.

Examples:
(Randle, birth_date, February 12 1949)
(Randle, played_for, Seattle Mariners)
(Randle, occupation, baseball player)

Step 8: Aggregate Triples
Combine triples from all sentences in the paragraph to form the knowledge graph.

Example graph:

Randle
├── birth_date → 1949
├── occupation → Baseball Player
└── played_for → Seattle Mariners

Advantages
Dependency-based extraction is more flexible than rule-based methods because it relies on grammatical relationships rather than exact phrase patterns. It can correctly extract relations even when sentence structures vary.

Limitations
Dependency parsing can produce errors, especially with long or complex sentences. The system also requires mapping verbs to relation types, which still requires some manual design.
